Hello everybody, and welcome back to
Exploring Quantum Physics.
I'm guest lecturer Ian Appelbaum, and
I'll be telling you about Stern-Gerlach
experiment.
In the last lecture, we found that
incorporating the correct relativistic
and variance into the quantum mechanical
wave equation.
Constructing the Dirac equation, not the
Schrodinger equation, left us with the
requirement that the electron wave
function has two components.
Our hope is that understanding this
degree of freedom will lead to an
explanation of the anomalism effect,
where gas discharge spectral lines are
split into more than the three components
of a Lorentz triplet.
The Stern-Gerlach experiment, the subject
of today's lecture, was instrumental in
revealing the underlying physics of this
so-called anomaly.
The experimental geometry of the
Stern-Gerlach Experiment was something
like this figure.
Where silver was heated in a vacuum so
that individual atoms with thermal energy
kBT of several thousand kelvin were
emitted from a furnace, and collimated
through two sequential slits.
This beam then passed through a region of
high magnetic field gradient
perpendicular to its velocity.
These were neutral atoms, so the magnetic
field itself did not affect the
trajectory.
However, for atoms carrying a magnetic
moment, the gradient of the magnetic
field will impart a force and deflect the
beam.
We can predict the observed deflection by
first calculating force.
This is just the gradient of potential
energy which we know from the dipole
interaction energy.
The displacement is given by the solution
to the classical equation of motion for a
constant force.
Using the time of flight, length over
thermal velocity, we then have a complete
expression that we can use to obtain
quantitative values of deflection.
For a gradient of about ten Tesla per
centimeter over a distance of three
centimeters.
We predicted deflection of 100 microns
for a moment of one Bohr magnetron
oriented parallel to the gradient.
If the moment is oriented anti parallel,
the deflection is in the opposite
direction.
Now if the magnetic moments of the
neutral atoms are distributed randomly
upon emission from the furnace, as
expected from a classical degree of
freedom.
This deflection will vary continuously
and merely result in a broadened beam of
width times D.
So what happened?
What did Stern and Gerlach actually see?
Here's what Stern and Gerlach saw on the
glass slide removed from the apparatus,
after converting the nearly transparent
deposited silver into black silver
sulfide.
On the left is the deposited pattern from
the silver beam without the perpendicular
field gradient, and on the right is the
pattern with the field gradient.
Overlaying the pole geometry used to
create the gradient shows that that
horizontal deflection is greatest in the
middle, simply because the field gradient
is higher there.
The length scale shows that this
deflection is in the order of our
calculated 100 microns.
But the most remarkable thing about the
pattern with the magnetic gradient is
that it is not simply smeared as expected
from randomly oriented magnetic moments,
but that they're split into two well
resolved beams.
This postcard was sent to Bohr and it
says below something like,
congratulations on confirmation of your
atomic theory.
Stern and Gerlach thought that they were
measuring the orbital magnetic moment
predicted by Bohr's model.
But this was 1922 before the Schrodinger
equation, and the realization that the L
equals zero S dates have zero angular
momentum.
It doesn't measure the orbital component,
they were measuring the magnetic moment
of the intrinsic angular momentum of the
unpaired 5S electron.
This is rather unfortunately called spin
for historical reasons.
And the twofold splitting of the atomic
beam is due to the two possible
Eigenvalues of the Z component, plus or
minus h bar over two.
It's then natural to identify an
additional quantum number, the spin
magnetic quantum number M sub S, that
takes the value of plus or minus one
half.
A so-called g factor, nominally equal to
two, due to a relativistic effect called
Thomas procession from Lorentz boost,
must be included in the conversion from
angular momentum to magnetic moment.
We therefore identify the two components
of the electron part of the Dirac wave
function as the amplitudes of spin up and
spin down.
For those interested in the serendipity
behind this experiment, and the
historical development of the correct
interpretation.
I rem, recommend this popular account by
Friedrich and Herschbach in Physics
Today, very highly.
Incidentally, long after this extremely
important experiment, Stern won the Nobel
Prize during World War II.
But Gerlach was snubbed, in part because
he stayed in Germany to work on wartime
weapons development for the Nazis.
I said it was unfortunate that the word
we use for electronic intrinsic magnetic
moment is spin.
And this is because, although it's
natural to try to understand how an
individual particle can carry intrinsic
angular momentum, there's no classical
analog to it.
Still, one can find figures like this
propagating a false notion in text books.
In fact, the idea of spin was at first
ridiculed for the very reason that the
geometrical interpretation leads to
nonsense such as this.
If an electron is a spinning charged
sphere, then what's the velocity at the
electron surface?
We can calculate the classical electron
radius, by equating the electrostatic
potential energy needed to assemble
charge E into the sphere with the
electron rest mass.
And then use it to determine the velocity
necessary to generate one Bohr magneton.
The result is the speed of light divided
by the fine structure constant.
A dimensionalist quantity equal to about
one over 137, far less than unity.
The velocity then would have to be over
two orders of magnitude higher than the
speed of light.
Clearly nonsense.
This issue played an important role in
history.
Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck are credited with
the correct interpretation of the
Stern-Gerlach experiment in 1925, as
being due to the intrinsic electron
angular momentum.
But perhaps only because they were lucky
enough to have an open-minded advisor,
Ehrenfest, who said, well, that's a nice
idea, though it may be wrong.
But you don't yet have a reputation, so
you have nothing to lose.
Whereas the same idea had apparently been
suggested several years before by Kronig,
who was thoroughly discouraged by his
mentor Pauli, who said, it's indeed very
clever, but of course has nothing to do
with reality.
Llewellyn Thomas, who introduced the
Thomas G factor, wrote a humorous letter
to Goudsmith after his paper's
publication saying the following.
I think you and Uhlenbeck have been very
lucky to get your spinning electron
published and talked about before Pauli
heard of it.
It appears that more than a year ago
Kronig, believed in the spinning electron
and worked out something.
The first person he showed it to was
Pauli.
Pauli ridiculed the whole thing so much
that the first person became also the
last, and no one else heard anything of
it.
Which all goes to show that the
infallibility of the Deity does not
extend to his self-styled vicar on Earth.